# The Role of Bitcoin in NGO Funding

Drew WatkinsPOS 260
02/27/2014

## Introduction
The work currently being done by NGOs is incredibly important. At the same time, there is an inherent danger involved with the monetary transactions which fund the operations of these NGOs. From laundering operations to CIA cash drops, there a a variety of ways NGOs gain funding outside of private donations. As we become more wired and embrace new payment systems, Bitcoin may provide a viable option  for money transmissions in the future. What are the potential successes that could come from such a system? Likewise, what pitfalls may be experienced? This paper will attempt to describe what such a system would look like, as well as the pros and cons of using digital currency for NGO funding.

## What is a Bitcoin?
Bitcoin is a rapidly expanding digital currency which has several traits making it a great way to transfer money between entities; overstepping national regulation and foreign borders. Boiled down to it's basics, bitcoin is a currency based on cryptographic keys, each corresponding to a specific "block" of money. These "blocks" are stored in "wallets", which are essentially digital bank accounts. The wallets are again just a set of cryptographic keys, eliminating third parties from being required to safeguard accounts.

Due to the technologies used in this currency, it is considered anonymous and nearly untraceable.  It was originally born from the need for a decentralized currency, removing third parties such as banks from the process of monetary transactions (Nakamoto, 2008). By separating transactions from identities, it is as anonymous and private as hard fiat currencies.

## Current Issues with NGO Funding
In today's political landscape, funding sources can create a significant effect on the success of an organization. This is of particular effect for NGOs operating in highly politicized countries such as Iran. Many groups which need to send aid to such countries lack the resources to effectively provide said aid. In a recent study, it was said that several Iranian NGOs were unable to function effectively due to "political stigmas" which prevented either (a) funding or (b) aid efforts (Bromideh, 2011). Other countries face issues with internal prosecution as well, such as humanitarian efforts in Sri Lanka. According to the Human Rights Watch (HRW), there is currently a large number of abuses against humans in refugee camps in the country. There is a cloak of silence on the issue though, as any citizens who speak out against the atrocities taking place may be placing themselves at risk of persecution and torture by the libertarian forces (The LTTE) (The Lancet, 2009).

There are additional problems related to funding for a much broader range of NGOs as well,  such as payment processing times. Though mainly a problem as it relates to quickly responding to large, catastrophic events, the time it takes to process typical bank donations can provide a hinderance to organizations, as well as making accountability to donors much tougher. Say, for example, someone sends $100 for tsunami aid. It takes a week to go from the credit card terminal to the bank account, another 3 days to perform an ACH or SEPA transfer to the overseas operation, and another portion of time to withdraw this money and put it to use. This makes the money unavailable in the moment, when it's needed.

## How Crypto-currency can Solve Funding Issues
Using crypto-currencies such as Bitcoin might very well be a strong solution to enable the flow of money in a quicker and more anonymous manner. Due to the lack of necessity to involve third party organizations such as national banks, Bitcoin is able to be used wherever internet access can be had. In fact, some NGOs are already starting to use the digital currency to further their efforts. Take the Sri Lanka Campaign for example; they are quoted as saying that many citizens decide not to donate to the campaign because of fear from military repercussions. This is a major issue because even if Sri Lankan citizens wish to donate to the cause, it is not worth the risk of persecution. If you go to their website now though, they recently started providing a Bitcoin wallet address for people to anonymously send funds to. Not only does this create anonymity for transactions from Sri Lankan citizens, accepting bitcoin also enables donations from anywhere in the world and processes transactions in a matter of seconds or minutes, not days or weeks. They are the perfect use case of how a NGO could effectively use digital currency to ease funding issues produced by intrusion upon human rights.

The Sri Lanka Campaign is not the only NGO accepting digital currency at this time either; the Bitcoin wiki lists close to 100 charities which currently accept Bitcoin, including at least three NGOs. One such example is Eudemocracia, which seeks to enhance democracy through technology. Through providing their software to groups in Argentina, including the city of Buenos Aires, they are seeking to open the government to create a more democratic approach. By accepting Bitcoin, it helps to speed transaction times and increase donations from outside the area they are helping. Recently, they also say they have been promoting the use of the currency in stores and markets within Buenos Aires, bypassing the high artificial inflation rates which exist within Sri Lanka (The Economist, 2011).

## Issues Surrounding Adoption
On of the biggest issues with making the transition to crypto-currencies is the usability of the technology for anything more than as a money-transfer protocol. One reason for this is the lack of technology which exists in some countries. Especially in rural areas, smartphones are not common and it's not feasible to purchase goods and services with bitcoin. There are companies working to enable the use of bitcoin on "dumb" phones, as well as paper wallets, but in the near term, bitcoin makes sense primarily as a money transfer protocol as opposed to a system to store funds long-term (allAfrica.com, 2013).

Other issues which make bitcoin unsuitable for long-term storage of funds is the volatility of the currency at present. From one day to the next, the BTC/USD exchange rate can fluctuate hugely, even by 15% or more. Because of this instability of valuation for bitcoin, funds need to be withdrawn quickly to avoid monetary losses. There are services which help to provide this functionality though, such as BitPay. This does eliminate some of the benefits which exist from the acceptance of Bitcoin though, especially as it relates to the speed of processing donations. Having to convert back to a hard fiat currency can take several days (though this is still less time consuming than accepting credit card donations online).

One final major issue to watch for is the security of the coins, primarily storage methods. If coins are to be put in long term storage, they should be stored in a secure "wallet", offline or on paper. Though the technical knowledge to do so is not very limiting, it is an additional step for the financiers to consider. The security aspect is important because when stored in a wallet with a third party or exchange, there exists a potential for theft, damage, or loss. In fact, this was recently exhibited during the Mt. Gox debacle in early 2014, which led to the loss of several hundred million dollars worth of bitcoin which were kept in Mt. Gox’s wallets.

## Conclusion
It is well established that NGOs provide good to the citizens of where they are trying to make a difference. At the same time, they face a variety of challenges, with funding being one of the largest. New technologies may be able to provide a solution though, and using bitcoin as a money transfer protocol is something which can already be put in place to provide more security and privacy to donors. At the same time, there are risks to watch out for. One must be careful to adhere to strong security practices and not overstep the regulatory issues of one’s country. One must also be prepared to combat volatility in the exchange rate and have a system in place for withdrawing money. In any case, it is certainly a feasible solution, especially for NGOs affected by fears of human rights abuse, but as with any emerging technology, there are a few hiccups to iron out before it goes mainstream.

### Bibliography
Nakamoto, S. (2008). Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Consulted, 1, 2012.

Bromideh, A. A. (2011). The widespread challenges of NGOs in developing countries: Case studies from Iran. International NGO Journal, 6(9), 197-202.

Sri lanka's twin humanitarian crises. (2009). The Lancet, 373(9676), 1667-1668. doi:[http://dx.doi.org.ezproxy1.lib.asu.edu/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60928-4](http://dx.doi.org.ezproxy1.lib.asu.edu/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60928-4)

Unfree exchange; currency controls in argentina. (2011). The Economist (US), 401(8758), 48.

"Hello Bitcoin, Goodbye Western Union? the Future of Remittance Could Be Digital." allAfrica.com. N.p., 22 Dec. 2013. Web. 27 Feb. 2014. [http://allafrica.com/stories/201312230545.html](http://allafrica.com/stories/201312230545.html).
