Andrew Watkins
ASB 252
11/20/2011

# An Anthropological Analysis of a Desert Duel
In the following pages, I’ll explore the recent Arizona State University vs. University of Arizona football game from an anthropological perspective. I chose this game because thanks to the bitter rivalry between the University of Arizona and Arizona State University, there are aspects of the game which are unique to it, as opposed to other collegiate football games. While analyzing the game, I took a role as a Arizona State University student, and as such, I observed it from the student section of Frank Kush Field.

Arizona State University and the University of Arizona are both large Universities located in Arizona. The two schools have had a rivalry for many, many years, thus giving special meaning to the sporting events which happen between them. The football game is actually a part of the Territorial Cup Series, a yearly competition between the two schools to see who wins the most sporting events. Because of it’s special and super competitive nature, The ASU vs UofA football game has also been referred to as the "Duel in the Desert".

Before exploring the significance of this specific game, let’s look at the actual sport of collegiate football. In a normal game, there are two schools (and thus two teams) which face off against each other. The game takes place place on a 100yd x 50yd field in a stadium which normally seats at least 50,000 people. The goal of the game of football is for one team to get more points than the other, although there are multiple ways of scoring these points. The first way is the touchdown, which is when the ball is either ran into the endzone or thrown to a player who is in the end zone, giving the scoring team six points. They then have the ability to either kick it through a pair goalposts in order to gain an extra point or to run the ball into the end zone again for two extra points. The second way of scoring in football is the field goal, which is when the ball is kicked into through the goalposts from somewhere on the field. The two teams take turns with possesions of the football. A "drive starts" when a team kicks the ball as far down the field as they can, leaving the opposing team to retrieve it. The offensive team then has four “downs” to take the ball at least 10 yards. If they take it the ten yards, they then get another four downs to continue taking the ball down the field. If they fail, the other team receives possession of the ball.  There is a system for accountability in football as well, in the form of several referrees. There are many types of penalties which can result from a myraid of different offenses, but most penalites result in time being taken off the clock, an addition or reduction of downs (depending on if the penalties was on the offense or defense), or physically moving the ball to a different spot on the field in a way which is detrimental the team on which the penalty was called on.

While watching the University of Arizona play Arizona State University, I noticed an extremely rambunctious crowd. Most of the crowd was seated around the stadium, but even still, their passion for the game was clearly evident through cheering, yelling, and other forms of support for their team. It was clear that they had a very deep connection to the game. In addition to the seated fans around the stadium, there was also several thousand ASU University students seated in a special section. This "student section" was especially rowdy. They also stood for the entire game, which is in contrast to the rest of the fans, all of whom were seated. In the student section, I noticed that there was a large number of security guards watching over the students. I also noticed that there were a few fights which almost broke out between students, giving proof to that argument that the environment was very hostile and volatile for all fans. The environment was especially dangerous for students from the University of Arizona though. There was one time shortly before the game started that a UofA student ventured into the ASU student section. They were immediately met with catcalls, threats of violence by many of the ASU students. In addition, thousands of students from ASU started chanting sayings such as “A-S-U!” or “This is our house!” in an attempt to intimidate the foreigners. Even during the actual game, ASU students continued to be very rowdy and enthusiastic. This was because of many reasons. Firstly, they were playing off of the energy of each other. For example, when a student would sit down, the students around him/her would start chanting “On your feet!”. A second reason why the energy was so high in the student section was because of organized efforts to keep the crowd pumped up. These include music pumping though the loudspeakers, a strong cheerleading section, and a slew of well-known traditions which took place at certain times throughout the game. Examples include the jingling of keys at kickoffs, the act of making a pitchfork symbol with a person’s hand and throwing it into the ground three times at the other team’s third down, and using that same symbol to point in the direction our the ASU end zone when ASU got a first down. I also noticed that there was a mascot (a “sun devil”) which helped to increase energy in the crowd by doing things such as pushups when ASU scored. Overall, the student section could simply be described as a very rowdy group of students using the game as an excuse to have some fun while still very much caring about supporting their school in the fight against the University of Arizona.

Arizona State ended up losing the game, which resulted in a dramatic change in the attitudes of the people who attended. People became much more somber and quietly left the stadium. They took the loss personally, which led me to believe that their sporting team was an extension of their very selves. Throughout the game, it was shown that the rivalry between ASU and UofA was a very emotional ordeal.
