# Theory of Social Identity and Collegiate Football Fans

Drew Watkins

Social Identity Theory, an explanation of why people tend to favor others of the same group or organization, can be used to explain many circumstances where individuals act in such a way that they wouldn't normally. For example, Social Identity Theory can be applied to teams within the workplace, religious organizations, and different 'cliques' of students. One situation in which I am very familiar with though is the interaction of fans at a collegiate football competition.

When at a sporting event, there are many examples of social identity theory at work, especially when talking about students. The most noticeable example of this can be seen by simply looking in the student section at a home game. One can see thousands upon thousands of students all coming together as one, chanting, yelling, and cheering as a single entity in an effort to support their team. In the case of many schools, this crazy throng of students even dresses the same (i.e.. how Frank Kush Field turns into a sea of gold on game day.), further solidifying their single identity.

Social Identity Theory can also be seen outside the stadium. For example, students and alumni can be caught wearing gear sporting their school's logo all around campus, proud to be a small part of their school's group of sports fans. This point isn't evident only on campuses though, or even near them. I've personally experienced in back home in Ohio. I was shopping at a Home Depot while wearing an ASU shirt this past summer and had an alumnus call out "Go Devils!!!" at me from across the store, proving that even complete strangers can feel a strong belonging to a group thanks to their school.

Finally, a discussion of fans acting as one can't go very far without the mention of rioting.There is a component of Social Identity Theory called "groupthink", which is basically a lack of common sense and critical thinking when surrounded by members of a group, mainly as a way of pleading loyalty to the group for fear of being kicked out of it. Rioting is a perfect example of how students pledge loyalty to their teams. Take the Penn State riots last October, for example. When the Board of Trustees unceremoniously removed Coach Paterno from his position as head coach, essentially gutting the program of everything it was known for, the students banded together as a form of combatting the direct assault upon their identity as Penn State football fans. Even though acts of violence such as overturning a news van or throwing things at police officers may not have been the smartest things to do at the time, groupthink allowed for these events to take place due to fear of their identity being ripped from under them.

Collegiate sporting events are a great example of how the Social Identity Theory works within large groups. From rioting to cheering, students, fans, and alumni are all bound by a single common identity, their football teams. All around the country, football fans come together as one entity, their social identity.
