Drew Watkins
PUP 200 - Cities in Cinema
November 2, 2012

# How Relationships Form in an Urban Environment

The movie Julie and Julia is a great example of how relationships and social networks form within a major metropolis. The concept of moving to an entirely new place where a person may not know anybody else can actually be quite interesting when one steps back and examines it. How does a person meet others? How do they find hobbies, friends, and their "niche" among the millions of other people? Julie and Julia is a movie which compares and contrasts two women as they embark on a journey learning how to cook; Juila, who moved to Paris in the mid 1950's, and Julie, living in New York in the early part of this century. This essay will attempt to compare and contrast them in a different light, not in an attempt to compare how they learned to cook, but instead how they came to rely on the people around them as they settled into their respective cities.

When Julia first moved to Paris, she was completely alone (aside from her husband). She tried to take up various hobbies, such as basket weaving, eventually ending up finding a passion for a professional cooking class. From the movie, it can be implied that Paris is a city with a great many opportunities for building a social network. The classes aren't the only thing that makes Paris great socially. The layout of the city itself helps to encourage interaction. According to Zachary Neal, author of "The Connected City", streets are like a circulatory system of human connections. In Paris, the city is laid out in such a way that facilitates easy interaction. The street venders which line the streets in place of traditional storefronts, the many back alleyways carrying throngs of people, and the fact that many residences are apartments that may actually share a courtyard or other common areas, all provide many opportunites for new introductions. In fact, Paris can be thought of as a giant college campus. For many college students, especially those in an urban environment like ASU in Tempe, classes and clubs are a way to meet others and build a social network. That is exactly what Julia did; she found a class which she could network in and she built a support system of a handful of other people she met in her community who had a passion for cooking.

Like Julia, Julie was also new to her area, having moved to a different borough in New York City. Already a fairly skilled cook, she decided to take on the challenge of cooking every recipe in Julia Child's Cookbook, writing a blog along the way. Unlike Julia, she was a working girl. The stress of working in a city can be completely overwhelming, and she had little time for building new friendships outside of the handful of people she knew from work and her previous residence. Aside from that, present day New York City is not exactly the best place to meet new people. It's residents have a busy way of life, and they do not really make the time to form bonds with strangers. Unlike Julia, Julie was able to find her network without joining clubs, instead finding it from her blog.

According to sociologist John Cacioppo, loneliness is not a quantitative physical measurement of acquaintances and relationships; instead it's more of a feeling of being surrounded and supported by others (New York Magazine). Running off of this theory, Julie's social network was her blog and it's followers. For example, she felt pretty lost before the started getting blog followers. It wasn't until people started following her and interacting with her online that she started feeling like she had a purpose and a belonging. This method of forming relationships is in stark contrast to how a person with ample leisure time, such as Julia, would go about building her social network within a city.

Cities are a great avenue towards meeting other people, but it's important to take into account their differences when analyzing how people within those networks form connections with one another. No matter how the city is built though, it is obvious that there is a human condition to become social, through any avenues available to them. It doesn’t matter if this socialization involves a physical social network deeply integrated into the city, like Julia, or making the best of being almost invisible while in a huge city through a "virtual" social network, like Julie, humans will adapt to their city's DNA and combine that with their interests and responsibilities to become social creatures.

## Works Cited
Communities Aren't Just Places, They're Social Networks; The Atlantic
*[http://www.theatlanticcities.com/jobs-and-economy/2012/10/communities-arent-places-theyre-social-networks/3492/](http://www.theatlanticcities.com/jobs-and-economy/2012/10/communities-arent-places-theyre-social-networks/3492/)*

Alone Together; New York Magazine
*[http://nymag.com/news/features/52450/index2.html](http://nymag.com/news/features/52450/index2.html)*
