Drew Watkins
PUP 200 - Cities in Cinema
December 2, 2012

# Social Networks in the Brazilian Slums

The movie "City of God" is an jarring, yet very accurate, representation of how life goes down in the slums (favelas) of Brazil. Set in Cidade de Deus (literally, the City of God), a slum on the outskirts of Rio, the movie portrays in great detail the true story of several gangsters who run the slum. Going off the facts of the movie and various supplemental readings, one can trace the path that one leads to become a gangster in a place like Cidade de Deus. Entrapped in the life of crime from the beginning, thanks to the lack of mobility that  comes from living in such an impoverished place, they quickly adapt. From a young age, they start building their social network and essentially choosing their path for the rest of their life. Unfortunately, at least according to the movie, there is no way to stop this vicious cycle of violence.

The lack of mobility available to favela residents is where the cycle of violence both starts and ends. Isolated in these shanty-towns, residents are cut off from the services and technological advancements of the inner-city. Take, for instance, the lack of schooling. According to a study by the World Bank Institute, less than 51% of residents in the slums northeast of Rio are literate. Unfortunately, the outlook doesn't show many signs of improvement. More than a tenth of children aren't enrolled in school, and as for secondary schooling, it's virtually nonexistent. Of course, as is often the case with these sorts of differences between the working/middle class and those who are impoverished, there is also a great deal of discrimination between those who live in the city as opposed to the favelados. People from places where violence is most common can be seen as bad company to most of the population, making it tough to get jobs, an education, or support from outreach groups. The gap between those who are educated and the slum-dwellers is only to increase in the coming years, seeing as how much of Brazil is transitioning to a skilled labor market, leaving those who are in poverty further and further behind, according to the study by the World Bank.

With such a bleak outlook for escaping slum life, favelados are forced to make do with the situation life has handed them. By building a strong social network and forming gangs, these people have found a way to keep on living. This networking can be explained by the theory of social capital, which essentially states that social networks have value, both to the individuals and the community as a whole. Unfortunately, in addition to providing support throughout the slum, the accumulation of social capital by the slumlords can also be a big problem. In fact, some drug lords even control access to services such as internet and garbage pickup (Jamie Worms), thus cartels have the ability to exert a huge presence in the communities, leading to high gang induction rates for youth. In an article by the New Yorker, slumlord Fernandinho actually compares himself to that of a mayor. He makes an income through drug trafficking, but at the same time he is quoted as saying "people come to me with their problems, and I take care of them." All too often though, this just results in another outbreak of violence. Although taken to the extreme, this aspect of the slumlord being looked to as a provider can be seen when the two gangs in "City of God"  start to go to war. Whenever one of the "constituents" of a territory wanted to get back at the other for any little thing, they just talked to Lil 'Ze or Knockout Ned and was given a gun or some help. Likewise, in the slums today, cartels fund many beneficial services for their residents, such as water and transportation. They even help fund the efforts of some non-profits and missionary groups working to better the community (Henry Buckle).

The culmination of the cycle of the typical favelados is that of an all out gangster. Having gotten deeply involved in the drug trade, their lives are one of violence. In the movie, it seemed that all that was happening was constant killing, so much so that after a while one could become numb to it. Amazingly, that is how life really is in the slums of Brazil. According to UNESCO, in 2003 there were a whopping 16,345 fatalities to youth under the age of 18 caused by firearms in and around Rio de Janeiro. Nowadays, at least 50-60% of the drug trade is done by those under the age of 18. Killing has literally become a way of life for favela residents; most men don't make it past the age of 25.

The brutal way of life depicted in "City of God" is truly horrifying, but the really amazing thing is that it was an accurate depiction of what's really happening in the slums and favelas of Brazil. Just like how the movie ended by hinting that new leadership would take over in place of Lil 'Ze's business, the cycle of life in the slums make it nearly impossible to break out of the cycle of violence caused by the poverty and gang warfare. If the government doesn't step up to the challenge of reforming it's communities, things will never improve. Impoverishment will still lead to a lack of education, and thus a lack of mobility. Being stuck in the slums will keep the social networks built by the cartels strong; and loyalty to gangs will keep fueling the violence. Without reform, favelas are simply not going to change, and the lifestyle depicted in "City of God" will continue indefinitely.

### Works Cited
**Assesing Social Mobility and Exclusion in Brazil; The World Bank**
*[http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWDR2006/Resources/477383-1118673432908/Assessing_Social_Exclusion_and_Mobility_in_Brazil.pdf](http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWDR2006/Resources/477383-1118673432908/Assessing_Social_Exclusion_and_Mobility_in_Brazil.pdf)*

**Evaluating Social Capital as it Affects Community Development in the Favelas of Rio de Janeiro; Jamie Worms**
*[http://www.academia.edu/319269/Evaluating_Social_Capital_As_It_Affects_Community_Development_In_the_Favelas_of_Rio_De_Janeiro](http://www.academia.edu/319269/Evaluating_Social_Capital_As_It_Affects_Community_Development_In_the_Favelas_of_Rio_De_Janeiro)*

**Gangland (The New Yorker); Jon Lee Anderson**
*[http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2009/10/05/091005fa_fact_anderson](http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2009/10/05/091005fa_fact_anderson)*

**The Favelas: Gangs, Violence, and Society; Henry Buckle**
*[http://www.watershed.com.br/article/231/the-favelas-gangs-violence--society.aspx](http://www.watershed.com.br/article/231/the-favelas-gangs-violence--society.aspx)*