Drew Watkins
PUP 200
09/29/2012

# The Closeness of Boston Communities

In the movie "Gone Baby Gone", one can see how a close-knit urban community keeps each other in check and takes care of others in their times of need. There are several examples of this community in the movie, such as how the community organizes vigils and provide support for the family who lost their child. Another example of how tight the community is that Patrick and Angie have so many connections to the underground scene within the community, even though they serve the role of private investigators. Lastly, the fact that the Kenzies were able to derive more information than the detectives, even when talking to some of the same witnesses.

Due to how the community in the movie was designed, it leads to a very tight feel because it is so closed off from the outside world. The design of the buildings themselves have a large role in this phenomena. They are very tightly grouped and some have multiple people living within the same building sometimes. Not only that, but the residents oftentimes will live in that one community for their entire lives, moving out from their parent's house only to live a couple buildings over, or even just a couple floors down. The last reason that the residents might be so tight is that the featured community is largely lower class. Whereas in some higher-class neighborhoods the population might be busy working or not spend much time at home, the people who have more free time tend to hang out on their porches and sidewalks outside their townhomes, thus meeting new people and continuing old friendships is very easy to do.

Since the community is very close  internally, it can lead to outsiders who enter it being treated with hostility. A great example of this is how the detectives were not very successful at pulling information out of people in the community. For example, the mother of the child who was kidnapped actually lied about where she was the night that the kidnapping happened. Not only that, none of the other witnesses let on to the truth about where she actually was that night. There are many examples of this sort of information withholding during the movie. The interesting thing, though, is that when an insider, or insiders, requested this information, they were able to successfully obtain it. They were not held back by the barriers put in place to protect against outsiders.

There are other reasons why the police were unable to coerce the same information that someone with ties to the community was able to. Based on the research of Elijah Anderson ("Broken Windows", Atlantic Monthly, 1982), people who commit crimes, or the “street scene”, have an inherent distrust in the police. This stems from the police being viewed as pawns of the upper class white community. This can help pave the way for those with closer ties to the community, such as Patrick and Anige,  to step in and help curb crime. According to Wilson’s research in “Broken Windows”, adding a recognizable member to the community, such as a foot officer with regular shifts, can help to give the feel of a safer community. In the movie, the Kenzies simply stepped in to fill this role as opposed to the officer in the reading.

Insiders like Patrick and Angie had two things going for them. The first is that they knew a large percentage of the community, and thus had a very large base with which to work with when investigating the kidnapping.The second thing is that they had already established a strong trust with most of the community. They were seen as people who could be turned to in times of need, and thus had many people who they could consult with when they needed information about what had happened. This was only the case because the community encouraged a tight-knit network.

There are several reasons why the Boston community featured in "Gone, Baby, Gone" was so tight-knit and inclusive, but most of it can be traced back to the architectural design and city layout. From the closely situated houses to the sidewalks designed to facilitate group formation, the unique features of the community are a great example of an inclusive community within a much larger city.
