Drew Watkins
Flurije Salihu
English 105
10/4/2011

# The Rhetoric of "G"
The Gatorade G-Series commercials have attempted to set out a new course for the brand. There are several reasons why this is the case, which will be explored in more detail in the following paragraphs. My basic conclusion is that by appealing to the current generation’s emotion towards sport, nutrition, and quest to always find the next great thing, the Gatorade G-Series advertisement effectively communicates a message to it’s viewers, even while abandoning all trace of fact. There are several reasons why this is possible, including the demographic targeted by the commercial, the star power within the ad, and existing acceptance of Gatorade’s product.

The latest commercial for G-Series (Gatorade has Evolved) starts with a series of scenes set back in the mid 20th century showing athletes who used water to hydrate before and during sporting events. As it goes through the numerous scenes, the ad also flashes several messages across the screen which serve to show examples of evolution in sports. Some examples of these messages are that basketball used to be played with peach baskets and that tennis rackets used to be wooden. The entire commercial is set to the soundtrack of "Evolve" which was sung Kevin Quinn and produced by David Banner. The song is modeled after the traditional gospel music which was often played and enjoyed during the 1950’s and early 60’s, when the first version of Gatorade was released, while also sneaking in a hip-hop feel to the song in order to influence the younger generation.

This first section of the commercial sets up the emotional plays for the rest of the commercial. This is done through the introduction of nostalgia. The black and white imagery paired with the 1950’s era music instantly captures the attention of anyone with a knowledge of sports. Heralded by many as one of the golden eras of sports, the 1950’s and 60’s were a time of great accomplishments. Olympic records were broken several times by Team USA, a number of baseball records were made, and African Americans and women were becoming accepted as serious athletic contenders. Along with these events, many movies, like "Rocky" and “Remember the Titans” were set during this era (these movies helped to associate a nostalgic link between sports and the mid-20th century). By using 50’s style music combined with black and white imagery, Gatorade instantly draws in those with a great attraction to sports culture and history through the use of nostalgia.

Building off of nostalgia which was already introduced, the second part of the commercial associates Gatorade with the evolution of sports. About two-thirds of the way into the ad, it says that hydration used to be water. At this point, the ad displays the message "In 1964, we started a revolution" and the ad switches from black and white imagery to color while showing a series of athletes drinking Gatorade. The music also switches from instrumentals to vocals which declare that “If you want a revolution, you have to evolve”. This is followed by a series of clips showing some great athletic moments of the past four decades. By associating Gatorade with athletic superstars such as Michael Jordan, Serena Williams, Mike Tyson, and Mia Hamm, the ad has managed to both remind the viewing audience of those sports accomplishments which happened while the athletes were using Gatorade and to also include a large number of endorsements by some of the greatest athletes of all time since the views make a connection between the great athletes and the use of Gatorade.

The second third of the commercial also utilizes a great deal of pathos outside of nalstalgia. By showing clips of athletes such as Michael Jordan, Mike Tyson, and Serena Williams, along with images of athletes drinking Gatorade and the celebratory tradition of Gatorade being dumped over a coach’s head after a win, the ad continues to hold the attention of sports enthusiasts. This is because the intended audience (teenage and young adult athletes) of the ad either remembers the great moments shown in the ad or recognizes the greatness shown, or at the very least is able to relate to them in some way through involvement in their own athletic endeavors and accomplishments.

In the final third of the commercial, the actual product is introduced. Gatorade quickly introduces their concept of "Prime, Perform, and Recover", a three part system consisting of carbohydrates to prepare for an athletic event, traditional Gatorade to hydrate during an athletic event, and protein, to help an athlete recover from a grueling athletic performance. This message is intermixed with more imagery of great sports moments, although now the video clips look brighter, clearer, and more vivid then in the middle section of the video. All the while, the continuation of the catchy 1950’s music combined with the fast pace of the commercial manages to keep the audience’s interest piqued and the nostalgia flowing.

The main emotional tactic used in the commercial seems to be the use of nostalgia. There are several reasons why nostalgia is a great marketing tool. According to Steve Elliot, a journalist for the New York Times, "Nostalgia is a critical component of pitches from sponsors" (Elliot, 2010). A handful of studies have been done about nostalgia as well, and it was found that nostalgia has the effect of invoking personal thoughts in a reader of an article much better than other forms of advertising (Strenge). In the case of Gatorade, the pairing of nostalgia in sports may be an even stronger pairing than most other commercials which use the principles of nostalgia. For the viewer, watching the Gatorade commercial conjures memories of not only great sports accomplishments, but also establishes a personal tie to the message since the viewer may be reminded of their own great athletic accomplishments, the camaraderie of being on a sports team, or their childhood dream of being a great sports superstar.

Even though the commercial is based around the evolution of a product and an emotional, nostalgic message, there are several other reasons why the G Series commercial is a great commercial. One such reason is because of how well it relates to it’s target demographic. Gatorade is trying to reach two groups of audiences. The first being high school athletes aged 13-17 and the second being highly athletic young adults aged 16-24 (Zmuda, 2010). The marketing message is so well targeted to these audiences that I would actually be led to believe that someone who doesn’t fit into Gatorade’s target group of dedicated athletes wouldn’t feel even the slightest motivation to purchase any of the components of the G-Series of products. For the intended audience though, the use of great moments in sports paired with the emotion brought about by the upbeat music and action-packed video is a powerful tool for encouraging athletes to try the new products.

One final reason why the Gatorade G-Series ad was so successful was because of the existing brand recognition that Gatorade has with athletes. As opposed to the various other sporting drinks such CarboRocket, Vitamin Water, or even Powerade, Gatorade has a much larger market share. They also have much better consumer recognition and customer loyalty (Gatorade has 4,178,379 "likes" on Facebook as opposed to Powerade’s 187,629). With this recognition though, comes another way to skirt around including any factual evidence backing Gatorade’s claims of  enhancing sports performance in the commercial. Because of their emotional link to Gatorade’s products, athletes will be anxious to try the new products made by the brand they already know and love, even if nothing besides the name has really changed.

Despite being highly effective, the prolific use of emotion the the G Series commercial does have some downsides though. In the commercial, one can see that there is absolutely no factual evidence to Gatorade’s argument that the G-Series will help an athlete to perform longer, faster, and stronger. The only information about the product is that it consists of three products, for use before, during, and after an athletic performance. This in itself can prove confusing to some people that Gatorade is trying to reach with it’s ads. For one, it seems as though the new branding leaves behind the massive market a pre-teens and teenagers who drink Gatorade as an everyday beverage as opposed to a sports drink. Additionally, in a survey of several 19-20 year old athletes, Gatorade was sending a message which brought about mixed signals about the new products. On one hand, athletes appreciated the new products which Gatorade came out with (the prime and the protein), but on the other hand, these athletes were worried that the traditional Gatorade formula would be changed from what they were used to and trusted (Lippert, 2010). Facts which further explain and back up what Gatorade is trying to sell, namely the two new products which complement the traditional Gatorade, would certainly go a long way towards helping explain the new products to viewers and potential customers.

As you can see, even without any consideration being given to fact, Gatorade has created a advertising masterpiece by playing off of the emotions of the people which watch their ads for their G-Series products. The advertisements for G-Series will effectively launch Gatorade into a whole new era.

### Works Cited
*Gatorade Has Evolved - YouTube*. *YouTube*. GatoradeVideos, 23 Apr. 2010. Web. 29 Sept. 2011. <[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sY66QCqNh1E](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sY66QCqNh1E)>.

Elliott, Stuart. "In Super Bowl Commercials, It Was All About Nostalgia - NYTimes.com." *The New York Times*. 07 Feb. 2010. Web. 04 Oct. 2011. <[http://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/08/business/media/08adco.html](http://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/08/business/media/08adco.html)>.

Lippert, Barbara. "The Beat Goes On." *Adweek*. 9 Mar. 2010. Web. 04 Oct. 2011. <[http://www.adweek.com/news/advertising-branding/beat-goes-102268](http://www.adweek.com/news/advertising-branding/beat-goes-102268)>.

Strenge, Robert. *WSU Researchers Explore Nostalgia’s Growing Impact on Advertising*. Rep. Washington State University. Web. 4 Oct. 2011. <[http://researchnews.wsu.edu/society/89.html](http://researchnews.wsu.edu/society/89.html)>.

Zmuda, Natalie. "What's a Sports Drink? Pepsi's Gatorade Broadens Target | News - Advertising Age." *Advertising Age*. 12 Apr. 2010. Web. 03 Oct. 2011. <[http://adage.com/article/news/a-sports-drink-pepsi-s-gatorade-broadens-target/143217/](http://adage.com/article/news/a-sports-drink-pepsi-s-gatorade-broadens-target/143217/)>.
