Drew WatkinsTMC 331: Quality Assurance
Dr. Gerald Polesky
April 21, 2015

# A Look at Total Quality Management

1. **Explain why quality became the most important issue facing American business in the 1980’s.  In addition to economic competition from Japan, what other factors may have contributed to the importance that quality has assumed?**With the introduction of Six Sigma quality improvement efforts from the Japanese in the 1980's, America had to adapt to maintain their status of hedgemon of the world economy. In addition, the influx of cheap labor from many Asian companies encouraged many American businesses to emphasize lower costs and higher volume over quality. Also, as customers began to experience the quality improvements that came with Japanese made products, it created pressure for American companies to ramp up their quality improvement efforts and adopt strategies such as Six Sigma and Total Quality Management to compete.Despite it's roots in Japan, Total Quality Management was actually further honed and perfected in America. Thanks to American businessmen such as Edwards Deming and Joseph Juran, Total Quality Management rapidly grew to hold a spotlight in business in the late 1990's. Since then, the principles of Total Quality Management have had their ups and downs. Several major companies, including Florida Power & Light and Douglas Aircraft have since cut their Total Quality Management programs to next to nothing, citing extraneous processes and mountains of paperwork. Recently, a resurgence in Lean Six Sigma has led to a renewed focus on TQM principles across businesses.2. **What implications do you think the forces that will influence the future of quality will have on management practice?**I define "the forces that influence quality" as being many. From educational instructors to customers of a business or service, these forces will either push towards or detract away from quality improvement efforts. Oftentimes, there will even be conflicting roles. For example, an instructor who inadequately teaches management practices to a student, but then that student goes on to a position where their customers insist on a high standard of quality. In general though, quality has been increasing through the years, not decreasing. Customers are demanding products which last longer and are built to last. Movements are arising which protest Chinese manufacturing and insist on hand-made products which are of a higher quality. Management will have to either adapt or go under.There are other influences within the world as well. With current events in international business going on which have everyday impacts upon the supply chain and value chain, Total Quality Management will be needed to overcome such setbacks. One such example is the strikes on the west coast shipyards. When events such as this happen, managers have to be able to rapidly adapt and implement new supply chain components (ie. moving manufacturing to Mexico) while ensure the quality of said product does not diminish. As the world continues to grow, expand, and intersect, growing pains will ensue and management will have to adapt quickly while maintaining quality standards their customers have come to expect.One thing to keep in mind during the coming years, though, is the increased focus on lean businesses and business practices. As more red ocean companies try to adapt blue ocean principles, it places stress upon Total Quality Management processes. Going back to the prior example, companies such as Douglas Aircraft and Florida Power have turned away from time consuming quality management practices, instead focusing upon rapid improvement and innovation strategies. At the same time, there are more small businesses in america than ever before. These businesses are focused upon bootstrapping, agile development, and lead project management techniques.In summary, where I see Total Quality Management headed is not towards a specific area, but instead towards a comprehensive discipline incorporating components of agile project management, lean six sigma process improvement, and an increased focus on global management.3. **How might you apply the concepts of TQM (Total Quality Management) to your personal life?  Consider your relations with others and your daily activities such as being a student, belonging to a fraternity or professional organization, and so on.**Total Quality Management is very applicable to daily life. By identifying key customers and stakeholders and developing a plan which directs oneself towards bettering them, one can apply Total Quality Management towards improving their life. Without a plan or accountability, it is unlikely that personal improvement will stick. That is why developing this critical strategy, setting a vision and specific targets to reach, and continually reflecting and analyzing the efforts can help to achieve these large goals.

One huge area where TQM can be applied in daily life is in fitness. TQM applies perfectly to fitness by way of feedback loops. By eliminating wasteful eating and encouraging collection of frequent (preferable autonomous) measurements, one can be on the fast track to losing weight and keeping a better eye on their body.

Another area where I have been able to apply TQM to my daily life is at work. I am currently employed as a facility manager for the Tempe Sun Devil Fitness Complex. I have been able to apply TQM through waste reduction in many areas by, among others:

1. Washing towels less often, resulting in fuller loads
2. Encouraging facilities staff to complete multiple tasks at a time in a given area, reducing wasted steps
3. Performing closing tasks closer to close, resulting in less rework  from patrons to re-dirty small gyms.
4. **In what ways might the lack of top management leadership in a quality effort hinder or destroy it?**According to iSixSigma, one of the key tenets of Total Quality Management is Management Commitment. As it is the management who is planning, deploying, and reviewing the quality improvement efforts, if the management is not of top quality, they may either not see the value of quality improvement or unintentionally not properly manage the efforts. These sorts of failures can cause not only failed projects, but also wasted time and money.5. **Discuss the implications of the following statements with respect to introducing TQ principles in a college classroom.  Do you agree with them?  How do they reflect TQ principles?  What changes in traditional learning approaches would they require for both students and instructors?**

* **Embracing a customer focus doesn’t mean giving students all A’s and abandoning standards.**Though students may often feel entitled to an easy class and an easy way to get a degree, the premise of higher education is that it should prepare students for the world after they graduate. If a student is not adequately prepared for after graduation, it results in a waste of money and time on the part of the student. On the flip side, the concept of grading is very much a short-term metric. It tests how well a student can pass a class, not how well they understand the material or how well they are prepared. A different sort of metric should be required to provide an optimal level of education.
* **If students fail, the system fails.**Systems inherently rely upon all parts to function efficiently. Students failing is part of a feedback loop which shows instructors that they are not performing to the highest quality they can. Whether it be not explaining concepts well enough, not providing clear instruction, not providing stimulating projects, not properly designing an online course, or any other number of things, students failing is often a sign that there is something wrong it teaching.
* **Faculty members are customers of those who teach prerequisites.**Exploring the entirety of the education system, when instructors of prerequisite courses do not properly educate their students, it prohibits higher level instructors from performing their jobs in the highest manner. When higher level instructors end up spending much of the class session teaching concepts which should have already been taught, it results in those instructors not covering all the material that a student needs to know.
* **Treating students as customer’s means allowing students to choose not coming to class.**As going to college is voluntary, as is signing up for specific classes, students should also be able to decide whether or not to come to class. Especially when many classes are just a recitation of the book, students should be able to elect whether it is worth their time to attend the class when it does not benefit them.
* **Completing the syllabus is not a measure of success.**Contrary to this statement, the instructor should properly prepare the students with a syllabus which lays out everything that will be covered over the semester. It is also upon the teacher to create a lesson plan which engages students and properly tests them. Though many syllabi may need to be updated to improve upon the topics laid out, completing the syllabus should equate to success in the topic at hand.
* **Eliminate performance appraisals based on classroom evaluations.**Classroom evaluations do not do a very good job at testing student's application in a topic. Instead, instructors should employ testing outside of the classroom through real world projects and base their evaluations upon that metric.
* **No matter how good the test, luck will be involved.**Luck is a concept which is not applicable to a well made test. Short of multiple choice tests, students should have to rely upon their knowledge to pass a test. Even if they do not draw specifically from what was taught on the class, drawing from personal experience or what they know from another class shows that they know what they are doing and are able to cross-link knowledge.

6. **Discuss the Lean Six Sigma methodology and its importance in the your current or potential career industry.**
Lean Six Sigma methodology is based around removing waste from business processes. As a combination of Six Sigma and Lean, Lean Six Sigma uses the five step DMAIC (Define, Measure, Analyze, Improve, Control) to achieve the desired improvements. It is also worth noting that there are many types of waste which can be improved upon, including:  defects, overproduction, waiting, underutilized talent, transportation costs, inventory, motion, and rework.In the field of healthcare, Lean Six Sigma has the potential to drastically reduce costs across the players involved. For device manufacturers, it can reduce the amount of waste used in designing the product. For providers, it can reduce errors in all manners of tests, as well as in the diagnostic process. Finally, the payers (insurance companies) can use Lean Six to reduce the errors involved in billing processes of procedures.Perhaps the place where Lean Six Sigma can make the most impact is within healthcare costs at a hospital, decreasing costs for both payers and providers. As part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, healthcare reimbursement is moving from a fee-for-service model towards a accountable care model. What this means in that instead of being reimbursed a set amount for each procedure done within a hospital, payers are now looking at the total costs associated with a given treatment plan and paying a lump sum in relation to that. This lump sum includes all work done within a hospital system, including readmissions. Thanks to this shift, hospitals have a huge incentive to decrease costs while increasing quality of care. This has brought about a number of topics in which to look at, including efficiency and effectiveness of patient care, a trend towards reimagining and reducing the complexity of the supply chain, and building a management system based upon more big data and analytics than ever before.
One of the foremost leaders in incorporating QUE and TQM practices into healthcare is Intermountain Healthcare, of Utah. According to Brent James, Chief Quality Officer and Executive Director of the Intermountain Institute for Healthcare Leadership, there are a number of ways that Intermountain Health is moving towards a more lean organizational structure. Identified over five areas, including:

	1. Massive Variation in Clinical Practices	2. High Rates of Inappropriate Care	3. Unacceptable rates of patient injury and death in preventative care procedures	4. Inability to do "what we know works"	5. Huge amounts of waste, leading to high prices which limit care.Further in his lecture, Dr. James looks at ways in which to limit said waste and improve patient outcomes. The first of these in subspecialization, where surgeons become more and more specialized in specific areas of medicine. The second method, and that which Intermountain Health adopted, was mass customization. The theory of mass customization essentially creates a shared baseline for each condition, then allowing doctors to customize for a patient's specific conditions, leveraging the human mind where it can have the most impact. By building these replicable, customizable, and evidence based practices through a focus on automatic process improvement and through the incorporation of lean leaning loops, Intermountain Health was able to make massive improvements across the board. In particular, their improvements made to patients requiring life support saw an average cost savings of ~25% and time savings of ~50%, in addition to an almost 5 fold increase in survival rates.In his work with Intermountain Health, Dr. James also looked at improvements which could be made to the supply chain to save costs. One of the key areas which his team looked at was treating non-ruptured appendicitis. Through the elimination and/or product change for several key medical devices used in the surgery, Intermountain Health was able to bring the average cost spent on devices per case down from 760 to 180 and total amount saved per patient to roughly 2,500. For appendicitis alone, theses changes to prevent waste resulted in a savings of nearly $1.3 million per year (plus additional open beds) to Intermountain Health Childrens Hospital.As is clearly evident, there is a boom in medical innovation happening right now. Brought about by many factors, including the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, new technologies, and easier access to statistical analysis, there is ripe opportunity for cost savings and waste reduction in the field of healthcare.
### Resources
Direction, S. Making it better: How Lean Six Sigma is transforming healthcare at UMCG. Strategic Direction, 30(10).

Behnke, L., & Breyfogle, F. (2005). Focusing the power of six sigma in the healthcare insurance industry: Lowering medical costs while improving patient service and outcomes. In ASQ World Conference on Quality and Improvement Proceedings (Vol. 59, pp. 449-455).

Introduction and Implementation of Total Quality Management (TQM). (n.d.). Retrieved January 26, 2015, from [http://www.isixsigma.com/methodology/total-quality-management-tqm/introduction-and-implementation-total-quality-management-tqm/](http://www.isixsigma.com/methodology/total-quality-management-tqm/introduction-and-implementation-total-quality-management-tqm/)

Total Quality Management. (n.d.). Retrieved April 21, 2015, from [http://www.economist.com/node/14301657](http://www.economist.com/node/14301657)

Dr. Brent James, Taking Quality Improvement to a Higher Level (2015 Mark McKenna Lecture) [Lecture]
